Each of your chromosome pairs has its own unique sequence of nucleotides. Genes are regions on the chromosome: their particular spellings of As, Ts, Cs, and Gs are the {instructions for your cells to make proteins.} The BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 genes, for example, instruct your cells to make &lt;tumor suppressor proteins&gt;. The particular order, or spelling, of base pairs make each of your chromosomes and each of your genes different from one another. Reading the order of these base pairs, and representing them in a digital format, is called &lt;genomic sequencing&gt;. This is what a very small portion of a huge genetic sequence looks like, spelled using As, Ts, Cs, and Gs:

\[SAME CLASSIC SCREENSHOT OF ATCG DATA, PREFERABLY FROM BRCA2, PERHAPS WITH ONE REGION OF SEQUENCE HIGHLIGHTED TO INDICATE A GENE\]

When all of a cell’s chromosomes have been ‘read’ in terms of As, Ts, Cs, and Gs, an entire &lt;genome&gt; has been &lt;sequenced&gt;. Every cell contains a copy of the DNA, so when one cell in an organism has its DNA sequenced, we have a pretty reliable copy of every other cell’s DNA \(need a disclaimer footnote here...\). Thus, a &lt;genome&gt; is all of the DNA information an organism has available, in every cell. Not all of your DNA contains genes, though. Relatively small portions of your DNA have genes that serve as protein instructions. The rest of the DNA mostly does nothing, but can also assist the cell in following the correct gene instructions. 

The process of ‘reading’, or sequencing, DNA is like taking a set of {chromosome “books” you inherited from your parent}, and scanning every single page so that you have a digital copy. Then, you can store and read the digital copy through different devices. Similarly, once scientists have a digitial copy of your chromosomes’ nucleotide sequences, they can use computer software to analyze their contents. Most often, with genetic tests, instead of ‘scanning’ all of your chromosomes and all of their genes, scientists only ‘scan’ and sequence the chromosomes and genes that are relevant to the test that was ordered. 

Genomic sequencing is a somewhat recent development. In 2001, the Human Genome Project created the first digital copy of a complete human genome. This first copy was actually made using many, many people’s DNA. Since then, a &lt;reference sequence&gt; has been created, which serves as an average representation of what human genomes look like. Because DNA sequences are 99.5% similar across the entire human population, the reference sequence actually represents a good portion of your DNA. However, many of your unique biological traits can be attributed to that 0.5% of your DNA that differs from the reference. 

Rather than storing all of your genomic data, a genetic test focuses mainly on how your DNA varies from the reference. Let us pretend for a moment that a genome contains words, instead of genes, and that the word /color/ is on the reference sequence. A genetic test would then indicate where this word is ‘spelled’ differently in other genomes. So, let’s say that your genome spelled the word color with a ‘u’, like /colour/. A genetic test would catch this difference, and flag it for the scientist. This insertion of a ‘u’ would be your variant, which would be represented in a specific format using lots of {numbers, symbols, and letters.} This variant would implicate what is different in the word, or gene, and where the difference is in the sequence of letters. The scientist can then use known information about the colour variant to interpret whether it impacts your risk of cancer. 

Two people who are unrelated might end up with the same variant, depending on how common it is. If two people with the same variant both end up with breast cancer, this might help scientists determine whether the variant is harmful. Sometimes, a genetic test reveals a variant that has been well documented, and can be associated with higher risk of disease. Other times, someone might have a variant that is known to not impact risk of disease. Most often, scientists need a lot more information about a variant; thus, it is not known whether many variants definitively increase risk of cancers. 

\[SCREENSHOT OF PATHOGENIC, BENIGN, AND VUS FROM DATABASE?\]

\[needs more/better visuals\]



